---
date: 2022-12-29
category: Release
author: Jon Mease
---

# Announcing VegaFusion 0.11
**VegaFusion mime renderer and transform evaluation**

By: Jon Mease

---

The VegaFusion team is happy to announce the release of VegaFusion version 0.11.0. This release is the culmination of several months of work on both VegaFusion itself and its new dependency: VlConvert.  This version introduces a brand new mime-type based renderer that is compatible with many notebook and compute environments without requiring custom extensions. It also includes a new `transformed_data()` function that makes it possible to evaluate the data transforms associated with an Altair `Chart` and return the result as a pandas DataFrame. Finally, support was added for several additional Vega transforms including `pivot` and `impute`. 

## Background
VegaFusion scales Vega, Vega-Lite, and Altair visualizations by moving data transformations from the browser to the server.

The initial focus was on supporting complex interactive visualizations that require a live two-way connection between the client and server.  This approach works well, but it relies on a custom Jupyter widget extension which adds complexity and limits the environments it can be deployed in to.

To address the common scenario of non-interactive visualizations...

## VegaFusion mime renderer

Add million point flights histogram example

VegaFusion 
## Transform Evaluation

Add top-k example

## Leveraging VlConvert

Both the new mime renderer and the `transfomed_data()` function require the ability to convert Vega-Lite specifications to Vega specifications in Python.

This is a challenge, blah blah blah.  So we developed a new library called VlConvert, link to blog post.

## Try it out!
